Modify rule S6045: Use LaYC format and update description for C++23 (CPP-5024) (#3797)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6045/cfamily/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

> Transparent function objects are function-like types that support heterogeneous operations. There are essentially two kinds of such types: transparent comparators and transparent hashers. In other words, a transparent comparator for strings would support comparing any two of `std::string`, ``++char const*++``, and ``++std::string_view++``.

Reviewer: I think it's broader than just these types...
```suggestion
Transparent function objects are function-like types that support heterogeneous operations. There are essentially two kinds of such types: transparent comparators and transparent hashers. For instance, a transparent comparator for strings would support comparing a `std::string` with a ``++char const*++``, a ``++std::string_view++``....
```

Reviewer: would support comparing a `std::string` with string-like types (such as ``++char const*++`` or  ``++std::string_view++``).

These transparent function objects are interesting for search-optimized containers such as `std::set` and `std::map`, including their `multi` and `unordered` variants. When transparent comparators/hashers are used, the containers enable additional overloads for many operations that support types different from their ``++key_type++``.

For example, `std::set<std::string>` is _not_ using transparent comparators. Invoking many member functions with a non-`std::string` argument leads to, implicitly or explicitly, creating a temporary `std::string` object because the functions only support an argument of the ``++key_type++``.

[source,cpp]
----
// Given a container c with a non-transparent comparator:
std::set<std::string> c = ...;

// Calling "find" with a C-style string (char const*)

> c.find("Nemo");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
auto it = c.find("Nemo");
```
I don't like discarding the value of find. And I don't like too verbose examples. I think just storing it might be a good balance...

// is equivalent to

> c.find(std::string{"Nemo"});

Reviewer: ```suggestion
auto it = c.find(std::string{"Nemo"});
```

// Calling C++20 "contains" with a std::string_view sv
// does not compile since conversion has to be explicit:

> //   c.contains(sv);
> // It has to be rewritten like this:
> c.contains(std::string(sv));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
//   if (c.contains(sv)) { ... }
// It has to be rewritten like this:
if (c.contains(std::string(sv))) { ... }
```

----

> Using heterogeneous comparison and hashing directly benefits the application performance since unnecessary temporaries can be avoided. This is particularly true when the ``++key_type++`` is `std::string`.

Reviewer: I don't think the performance improvement is more true for string than for other types.

 ```suggestion
Using heterogeneous comparison and hashing directly benefits the application performance since unnecessary temporaries can be avoided. Since so many string-like classes exist, and since suitable transparent function objects work with strings, there is no good reason not to use them.```

Reviewer: An excellent and very common example

> For this reason, this rule detects `std::set`, `std::map`, ``++std::unordered_set++``, ``++std::unordered_map++``, `std::multiset`, `std::multimap`, ``++std::unordered_multiset++``, and ``++std::unordered_multimap++`` types that use `std::string` as key and do not enable heterogeneous operations.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be at the end?

Author: Rewritten in https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/pull/3797/commits/14cd49763f. Let me know what you think.

Transparent comparators introduced in {cpp}14 include: `std::less<>`, ``++std::less_equal<>++``, ``++std::equal_to<>++``, etc. (This syntax leverages the default template parameter, which is `void`.) However, there are no standard transparent hashers.

You can override the default comparator and hasher for the type family of `std::set` and `std::map` by explicitly providing the corresponding template parameter.

=== Working with tree-based containers

`std::set`, `std::map`, `std::multiset`, and `std::multimap` are tree-based data structures that, by default, use `<` to compare the keys. Under the hood, they use `std::less<key_type>` to invoke the `operator<` on the keys.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void example() {
  std::set<std::string> sea = { // Noncompliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };
  sea.find("Nemo"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Nemo"}.

  std::string_view hero{"Nemo"};
  sea.contains(std::string(hero)); // Extra temporary std::string.
}
----

> Unfortunately, the default `std::less<std::string>` is not transparent.

Reviewer: I don't think it's unfortunate... See S6021

```suggestion
The default comparator for `std::set<std::string>` is `std::less<std::string>`  which  is not transparent.
```

  std::string_view hero{"Nemo"};
  sea.contains(hero); // No need to create the std::string anymore.
}
----

When `find` is called, the STL essentially invokes

[source,cpp]
----
std::less<void>::operator(std::string const& lhs, const char* rhs);
----

This results in `lhs < rhs`. In other words, it compares the `std::string` against a C-style string with no undesired temporaries.

It works equivalently for `std::map`: `std::map<std::string, SomeType>` should be rewritten as `std::map<std::string, SomeType, std::less<>>`.

=== Working with tree-based containers and custom comparators

Sometimes, it is useful to use a custom comparator, for example, to implement a case-insensitive string comparison.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
struct CaseInsensitiveCompare {
  bool operator()(const std::string& lhs, const std::string& rhs) const {
    return /* ... */;
  }
};

void example() {
  std::set<std::string, CaseInsensitiveCompare> m = { // Noncompliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  m.lower_bound("nemo"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Nemo"}.
}
----

> However, like `std::less<std::string>`, `CaseInsensitiveCompare` is not transparent, and the code contains undesired temporary strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, like `std::less<std::string>`, `CaseInsensitiveCompare` is not transparent, and the code will trigger the construction of undesired temporary strings.
```

==== Compliant solution

> A comparator needs to explicitly declare itself as transparent. For this purpose, the {cpp} standard assumes that a comparator with an inner type named `is_transparent` is heterogeneous. The type itself does not matter.

Reviewer: The comparator is not heterogeneous; the container is.
```suggestion
A comparator needs to explicitly declare itself as transparent. This is achieved by having and inner type named `is_transparent` in the comparator. The type itself does not matter.
```

Furthermore, the comparator needs to provide heterogeneous comparisons. There are multiple ways to achieve this:

> . Its `operator()` could be templated, like `std::less<void>` does.

Author: ```suggestion
. Its `operator()` could be templated and written in a generic way, like `std::less<void>` does.
```

. It could provide the relevant overloads for the software.

> . Or it can provide one overload that handles any kind of key.

Reviewer: I don't get this one.

Author: The last one? I intended to explain you can have one overload that supports comparing any relevant type. I guess I should mention that the keys need to be converted to the operator parameter type for the sentence to make sense...

What about this, combined with the above suggestion?

```diff
-. Its `operator()` could be templated, like `std::less<void>` does.
+. Its `operator()` could be templated and written in a generic way, like `std::less<void>` does.
 . It could provide the relevant overloads for the software.
```

```suggestion
. It can provide one overload whose lightweight parameter type can be constructed from key-like types.

With the first and third options, the implementation is reusing existing functions and types by delegating the comparison operation to them.
```

Author: I've merged the change in 04a666beb44ee018e3acaca3143cb19dbbd7adaf. Let me know if you have more feedback.

    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  sea.erase("Darla"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Darla"}.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

{cpp}14 provides transparent equality functors in the form ``++std::equal_to<>++``. However, there is no standard transparent hasher object.

You can apply the same strategies to create custom hashers as the ones presented above for custom comparators. When the key is `std::string`, you can essentially leverage ``++std::string_view++`` and the implementation of `std::hash` for this lightweight type:

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
struct StringHash {
  using is_transparent = void; // Enables heterogeneous operations.

  std::size_t operator()(std::string_view sv) const {
    std::hash<std::string_view> hasher;
    return hasher(sv);
  }
};

void example() {
  std::unordered_set<std::string, StringHash, std::equal_to<>> sea = { // Compliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  sea.erase("Darla"); // No more temporary std::string{"Darla"}.
}
----

Finally, working with a custom equality comparator for hash-based containers is similar.

=== Pitfalls

> Transparent comparators/hashers are strongly discouraged when used with types that are not directly comparable as it will lead to the creation of ``++O(log(container.size()))++`` temporaries with lookup functions such as ``++find++``, ``++count++``, ``++lower_bound++``, ...

Reviewer: Directly add reference to S6021, in which case, we don't really need to explain too much here.

Author: Once we migrate S6021 to LaYC format, why not. For now, I prefer linking to it in the Ressource part.

  bool operator()(const std::string& lhs, const std::string& rhs) const {
    return std::ranges::lexicographical_compare(lhs, rhs, [](char l, char r) {
      return std::tolower(l) < std::tolower(r);
    });
  }
};

void example() {
  std::set<std::string, CaseInsensitiveCompare> m = { // Noncompliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  m.lower_bound("nemo"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Nemo"}.
}
----

However, like `std::less<std::string>`, `CaseInsensitiveCompare` is not transparent, and the code triggers the construction of undesired temporary strings.

==== Compliant solution

A comparator needs to explicitly declare itself as transparent. This is achieved by having an inner type named `is_transparent` in the comparator. The type itself does not matter.

Furthermore, the comparator needs to provide heterogeneous comparisons. There are multiple ways to achieve this:

. Its `operator()` could be templated and written in a generic way, like `std::less<void>` does.
. It could provide the relevant overloads for the software.
. It can provide one overload whose lightweight parameter type can be constructed from key-like types.

> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  sea.erase("Darla"); // No more temporary std::string{"Darla"}.
}
----

Finally, working with a custom equality comparator for hash-based containers is similar.

=== Pitfalls

Transparent comparators/hashers are strongly discouraged when used with types that are not directly comparable or expensive to create. For example, in the example above, if `CaseInsensitiveCompare` had the inner type ``++is_transparent++`` but its `operator()` still had ``std::string`` arguments, each internal comparison performed by ``++lower_bound++`` would create a temporary `std::string`. This would be significantly worse than the original version, which creates only one temporary object.

The standard comparator types existed before {cpp}14, but their type parameter had to be provided. {cpp}14 introduced a default value for the template parameter, `void`, alongside a template specialization that is the transparent comparator. Therefore, when creating an object of such type, it is essential to write ``++std::less<>++`` and not ``++std::less<std::string>++``, for example.

> ---

Author: Leftover
```suggestion
```

  bool operator()(const std::string& lhs, const std::string& rhs) const {
    return std::ranges::lexicographical_compare(lhs, rhs, [](char l, char r) {
      return std::tolower(l) < std::tolower(r);
    });
  }
};

void example() {
  std::set<std::string, CaseInsensitiveCompare> m = { // Noncompliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  m.lower_bound("nemo"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Nemo"}.
}
----

However, like `std::less<std::string>`, `CaseInsensitiveCompare` is not transparent, and the code triggers the construction of undesired temporary strings.

==== Compliant solution

A comparator needs to explicitly declare itself as transparent. This is achieved by having an inner type named `is_transparent` in the comparator. The type itself does not matter.

Furthermore, the comparator needs to provide heterogeneous comparisons. There are multiple ways to achieve this:

. Its `operator()` could be templated and written in a generic way, like `std::less<void>` does.
. It could provide the relevant overloads for the software.
. It can provide one overload whose lightweight parameter type can be constructed from key-like types.

> With the first and third options, the implementation is reusing existing functions and types by delegating the comparison operation to them.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I like this sentence: 
- The 2nd version may also delegate to other functions
- I don't think it really add value...

Could it just be dropped?

```suggestion
```

> When working with `std::string`, the last option may often be the simplest thanks for `std::string_view`.

Reviewer: I think this sentence has become redundant with the next one.
```suggestion
```

> For instance, to implement a transparent case-insensitive comparator for strings, we can leverage the fact that ``++string_view++`` offers lightweight conversions. Furthermore, this class provides the same functionality we need from `std::string`, which allows us to update `CaseInsensitiveCompare` by changing two lines:

Reviewer: I don't understand this part: 
> Furthermore, this class provides the same functionality we need from `std::string`

Maybe:
```suggestion
For instance, to implement a transparent case-insensitive comparator for strings, we can leverage the fact that ``++string_view++`` offers lightweight conversions. Furthermore, since ``++string_view++`` and `string` have very similar interfaces, the implementation of the comparator can remain unchanged:
```

Author: Thanks, it's easier to read!

    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  sea.erase("Darla"); // This leads to a temporary std::string{"Darla"}.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

{cpp}14 provides transparent equality functors in the form ``++std::equal_to<>++``. However, there is no standard transparent hasher object.

You can apply the same strategies to create custom hashers as the ones presented above for custom comparators. When the key is `std::string`, you can essentially leverage ``++std::string_view++`` and the implementation of `std::hash` for this lightweight type:

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
struct StringHash {
  using is_transparent = void; // Enables heterogeneous operations.

  std::size_t operator()(std::string_view sv) const {
    std::hash<std::string_view> hasher;
    return hasher(sv);
  }
};

void example() {
  std::unordered_set<std::string, StringHash, std::equal_to<>> sea = { // Compliant
    "Dory", "Marlin", "Nemo", "Emo", "Darla"
  };

  sea.erase("Darla"); // No more temporary std::string{"Darla"}.
}
----

Finally, working with a custom equality comparator for hash-based containers is similar.

=== Pitfalls

> Transparent comparators/hashers are strongly discouraged when used with types that are not directly comparable or expensive to create. For example, in the example above, if `CaseInsensitiveCompare` had the inner type ``++is_transparent++`` but its `operator()` still had ``std::string`` arguments, each comparison inside ``++lower_bound++`` would create a temporary `std::string`. This would be significantly worse than the original version, which creates only one temporary object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transparent comparators/hashers are strongly discouraged when used with types that are not directly comparable or expensive to create. For example, in the example above, if `CaseInsensitiveCompare` had the inner type ``++is_transparent++`` but its `operator()` still had ``std::string`` arguments, each internal comparison performed by ``++lower_bound++`` would create a temporary `std::string`. This would be significantly worse than the original version, which creates only one temporary object.
```
